">> Tonight on FRONTLINE/World,"
two Stories From a Small
"In the Middle East, powerful"
Arab television channels are
fueling a media revolution.
">> Here, politics
and news are a"
matter of life and death.
>> They are fighting a war of
ideas.
>> Al Jazeera is catering to
"their audience, just like Fox"
News.
>> FRONTLINE/World examines
these new Arab voices and why
we should tune in.
>> America has never been less
"influential, and
nobody needs to"
understand that more than
">> Around the world, there has"
never been a more deadly year
for journalists.
>> Harrant was shot just outside
his office by a 17-year old
Turkish nationalist.
"100,000 people came to his"
funeral.
>> How reporters are risking
their lives and their freedom
to uncover stories that
challenge the powerful.
>> Atwar's killing shocked
"Iraqis, because, to them, she"
was really the symbol of
>> FRONTLINE/World is made
possible by Shell.
Supporting freedom of the
press.
">> As you can see, people are"
gathering around...
>> And the independent
journalists...
>> How do you respond to these
charges...
>> ...who tell the stories of
And by the William and Flora
Hewlett Foundation.
And the John D. and Catherine
T. MacArthur Foundation.
Major funding for News War is
provided by the Richard and
Rhoda Goldman Foundation.
With additional funding from
>> REPORTER: The U.S. State
"Department has over 30,000"
employees.
"Only 20 speak Arabic fluently,"
and just 150 are even
conversant.
One of them is Duncan MacInnes.
"His skills are
so valuable, he's"
been reassigned to fight a new
kind of war: the war over
America's image in the Arab
world.
>> The U.S. has been in a
difficult time in the Middle
East since 9/11.
It's a very tough environment
with a lot of anti-Americanism.
>> REPORTER: It's 5:00 A.M. in
"Washington, already
afternoon in"
the Middle East.
>> The joint press conference...
right.
>> REPORTER: The State
Department's new rapid response
unit wades through 150 Arab news
channels to hear what they're
saying about America.
>> George Bush...
( speaking Arabic )
">> What are Arabs seeing, and"
what does that mean for us?
"For instance, in Iraq, because"
Arabs are upset about the
presence of foreign forces in an
"Arab country,
there are no good"
images of an American soldier.
An American soldier building a
hospital in Iraq is still an
American soldier in Iraq.
"In that case, all images are"
bad.
"And so we need
to know that, we"
need to know that that's what
they see.
">> REPORTER: A
decade ago, these"
channels didn't exist.
"Then came Al
Jazeera, the first"
pan-Arab news channel.
It launched a media revolution
across the Middle East.
"Now, hundreds of channels"
compete for market share and
political influence.
At a time of convulsive change
"and war, television
is a weapon"
>> ( speaking Arabic )
>> REPORTER: And Washington has
joined the fight with its own
"Arab news channel, based in a"
"Al Hurra, which
means, ""the free"
"one,"" beams the U.S."
government's view of the news to
the Arab world 24 hours a day.
>> There are some 250 satellite
"channels in the
Middle East, for"
"instance, and we have to be"
credible and we have to be
engaging in order for them to
listen to us.
We don't believe there is one
single channel out there that
accurately portrays America and
its values and its policies
and... or even the news in
"general, for that matter."
>> REPORTER: The top story this
"day was from Lebanon, the"
birthplace of Arab journalism.
As their Beirut correspondent
"described, the pro-American"
"And so I went to Beirut, the"
first stop on a journey to see
the Arab media revolution in
action.
"On the road into town, the"
leader of the Islamic Hezbollah
"Party, Hassan
Nasrallah, asserts"
his authority.
I was curious how Washington's
"channel, Al Hurra, covered"
"Hezbhollah, one of America's"
At a desk rented from the
"Associated Press, I found Al"
"Hurra's bureau chief, who I'd"
seen reporting on TV.
We'd barely met when she got an
anonymous text from Hezbollah.
">> ""If you are
interested, watch"
the important speech to Said
Hassan Nasrallah at 1:30 today
afternoon on Manar TV.
"Wishing you a
beautiful Sunday."""
I don't know who's the person
sending this S.M.S. to me.
>> REPORTER: We agreed to meet
later.
"I wanted to see Manar TV, the"
Hezbollah channel.
We were taken to a secret
location.
So we can't film where we're
going?
">> No, and someone is going to"
come get us and take us to the
location because they're really
careful about security.
"They're really paranoid, I"
"guess, or, you know, afraid"
because they've been hit...
>> REPORTER: Israel had tried to
bomb Al Manar off the air and
failed.
>> And they just want to make
sure that we don't know where
the place is.
">> REPORTER: Now,
we could only"
film only in their news
director's office.
What are you watching?
">> Well, you see that's BBC,"
"CNN, Jazeera, Arabiya, and"
Lebanese Channel.
">> Hezbollah says Al Manar is,"
"""A station of
resistance against"
"the Zionist enemy."""
>> ( translated ): People here
have a cause.
And it's very difficult to
separate between of the cause
and their work.
"Well anyway, I
will ask you: do"
you know any neutral media in
the world?
"Can we say that BBC, for"
"instance, is neutral?"
"Can we say CNN, they are"
neutral?
There is always an influence
between the owner of the media
and the people who work there.
"And as you know, Lebanese"
cannot...
>> Or the media itself.
Between the owner and the media
itself.
">> REPORTER: Yes,
I understand."
>> ( translated ): Between the
owner and the media itself.
"So, are we soldiers?"
"Maybe, but we are first"
professionals.
>> Journalists.
">> Professional
journalists, of"
course.
>> REPORTER: They wouldn't let
us near Nasrallah's speech.
We were taken instead to a
Hezbollah-run cafe in South
"Beirut, the only place foreign"
media were allowed to film
Hezbollah supporters watching
their leader on Al Manar.
Founded in the early '90s with
"help from Iran,
Al Manar is now"
"on satellite, too-- a part of"
Hezbollah's strategy to spread
its message across the Arab
world.
About 15 million people watch Al
Manar and its steady stream of
propaganda.
( singing in Arabic )
"In America and much of Europe,"
the channel is banned as a
terrorist outlet.
I was invited to sit through all
of Hassan Nasrallah's speech.
It lasted over an hour.
I didn't understand a word.
>> ( speaking in Arabic )
">> REPORTER: That night, I was"
back with the correspondent for
"Al Hurra, the
American channel."
Its policy has been to restrict
coverage of Hezbollah.
She cut the speech down to 30
seconds.
Which part of his one-hour
speech are you using?
She told me Nasrallah was
threatening street
demonstrations if the government
"didn't resign immediately, and"
that he mocked the Prime
">> REPORTER: For
the other side,"
she found a pro-government
"official, the kind of Arab"
politician America likes to
think is an ally.
I wondered how useful Al Hurra
was to him.
What do you think about Al Hurra
and why do you decide to go on
it?
">> Well, let me tell you."
I'll be very sincere with you--
I think that with Al Hurra being
"an American
television, what do"
you say in English is if the one
carrying the message is not
"credible, the message is not"
credible.
"So, I think that
it's much more"
of a television that is perfect
on all levels and which I have
"lots of friends, but still"
speaks in the name of America in
this part of the world.
"Like Al Manar, for instance."
Al Manar speaks for Hezbollah.
They don't have anything
neutral.
>> REPORTER: Al Hurra claims 20
million viewers.
Outside experts say the real
number is closer to a tenth
that.
"To broaden its appeal, the"
channel recently expanded
coverage of Hezbollah and other
anti-American groups.
"But for many viewers, Al Hurra"
>> REPORTER: Al Manar-- do you
>> REPORTER: Since the war with
"Israel, Al Manar's
influence has"
>> REPORTER: But in Lebanon and
"across the Arab
world, the most"
watched channel remains Al
"Jazeera, with over 50 million"
viewers.
"So far, their P.R. advisors,"
"wary of more bad
press, wouldn't"
give us access.
"After weeks of
phone calls, they"
finally agreed.
">> Well, all
right, thank you so"
"much for calling back, because"
we were getting a bit desperate.
( laughs )
Yes.
>> REPORTER: That got us into Al
"Jazeera's Beirut
bureau, by far"
the largest in town.
They'd just heard the prime
minister was about to respond to
Hezbollah's demand that he
resign.
">> It's at 11:30,
so if you want"
"to go, we can go in half an"
"hour, I think."
>> REPORTER: Her reports during
the recent war made Bushra Abdel
Samad well known across the
Middle East.
"She's Lebanese
herself, and says"
"objectivity is impossible,"
especially about Israel.
">> I try to be
neutral because,"
"you know, all the political"
"problems in Lebanon, so it's a"
bit difficult to be neutral.
And that's the main issue that I
think about almost all the time.
"After the war in Lebanon, lots"
of people thought that we used
to work... and we are pro-
Hezbollah just because it was
our position during the war.
"It wasn't with
Hezbollah, it was"
against what Israel was doing.
"So, you cannot have another"
position in a situation like
"this, I think."
>> REPORTER: I followed her to
the government press conference.
I was about the only Western
journalist there.
And now I understood what this
media revolution was all about.
"For the first time in history,"
Arab journalists had the freedom
and clout to bypass governments
across the region and shape
public opinion.
"Prime Minister Sinoura, a key"
"U.S. ally, seemed
desperate, his"
">> REPORTER: No,
we're finished."
"No, we're not."
We're finished.
Beirut was tense.
"Camera down, Frank."
It felt like a crisis was about
"to break, but we were late for"
our flight to Al Jazeera's
headquarters.
>> Bye.
Have a nice trip.
>> REPORTER: Thank you very
much.
( yelling in Arabic )
As we arrived in the gulf state
"of Qatar, we learned a top"
government official had been
assassinated minutes after we
"left Beirut, the latest in a"
string of political killings.
>> A father and a country in
shock as another prominent
anti-Syrian politician is
assassinated...
>> REPORTER: Pierre Gemayal was
from a prominent Christian
"family, and many of his"
supporters blamed Hezbollah.
"Suddenly, Lebanon
seemed on the"
brink of civil war.
( speaking in Arabic )
"At Al Jazeera's
headquarters, we"
"met their Beirut bureau chief,"
who happened to be in town.
He learned about a fax from a
Lebanese group claiming ties to
>> REPORTER: Many extremist
groups use Al Jazeera to get
>> REPORTER: What are they
saying?
>> They said that they are
behind the assassination of Mr.
Pierre Gemayel.
>> REPORTER: Is this an unknown
group?
">> Unknown group, yes."
First time.
>> REPORTER: What are you
feeling?
You don't think... you don't
think they really did it.
>> I don't... I don't think... I
don't think.
"You know, now in Lebanon, we"
"have Al Qaeda, a strong Al"
"Qaeda, but I
don't know if they"
are behind the assassination of
Mr. Pierre Gemayal.
>> REPORTER: Were you surprised?
>> I was surprised of
assassination of Pierre Gemayal.
He was my friend.
>> REPORTER: The group's claim
wasn't reported on air.
That power to filter information
used to rest with Arab
"governments, until the"
journalists at Al Jazeera began
to interpret events themselves.
">> The last few years, in the"
"Middle East, the main hotspots"
of the world are taking place
"here around us, around the"
territory of Al Jazeera.
"In a way, that if you speak"
"about Palestine, Afghanistan,"
"Iran, Iraq, Somalia, Darfur,"
"wherever, Iran, Lebanon, the"
conflict zone... this area has
become an open conflict zone.
"Therefore, we are a TV station"
that is trying to project a
certain reality rather than
trying to influence the course
of events.
>> REPORTER: Though its
"journalists claim
independence,"
Al Jazeera is in fact owned by
"the government
of Qatar, which,"
"rather incongruously,
also hosts"
the biggest American base in the
Middle East.
Government officials won't talk
about Al Jazeera.
Analysts say it's part of a
delicate balancing act.
">> Qatar is very small, tiny"
"place, and the
only thing to do"
to be big on the international
scene is to have... to be a
media mogul.
That's the only way to make sure
to put your enemies on the
"defensive, to
make sure that you"
have enough audience to support
your cause if you are taken over
by Iran or some neighboring
country.
>> REPORTER: From the start of
"the Iraq War, the channel"
covered the insurgency from the
"inside, including footage of"
attacks on U.S. troops.
The Bush administration was
incensed.
"Mamoun Fandy, an Egyptian-"
American scholar of the Arab
"media, advised
Washington on its"
response to the channel.
">> Al Jazeera, in terms of the"
"Iraqi story, was a tool of"
recruitment of fundamentalists
"throughout, through videos,"
through various programming
that's worth three divisions of
the American army.
">> After the fall of Baghdad,"
the Americans started accusing
us of inciting emotions against
the American troops.
>> REPORTER: Were you?
>> Of course not.
I was at that time the bureau
"chief, actually, in Baghdad."
">> REPORTER: In
2004, Al Jazeera"
was kicked out of Iraq.
>> The environment then was very
"tense, and I
think they thought"
closing down the bureau will
enhance the opportunity of
projecting another image about
Iraq.
"Unfortunately,
that was not the"
case.
"During the last two years,"
things have escalated in Iraq.
That was not Al Jazeera that was
actually responsible for giving
>> REPORTER: But the channel is
responsible for the prominence
it gives each new statement from
>> REPORTER: In this recent
"tape, bin Laden criticized"
Western governments for trying
>> REPORTER: The tapes are not
played in their entirety.
Each is followed by analysis
from several viewpoints.
">> When those tapes are aired,"
they are aired for their news
value.
And the official position is
that it is a valid viewpoint.
I think you have to put the
station in its cultural and
"political context, and the"
cultural and political context
of the Arab world is that the
region is becoming increasingly
more conservative.
"And the idea is that, if you"
have an audience that you want
"to capitalize on, you have to"
reflect the hopes and concerns
of that audience.
And that audience is getting
increasingly more conservative.
>> REPORTER: From inside its
bureaus in Washington and around
"the world, Al Jazeera can look"
like any other news
organization.
But its accusers say it is
staffed by members of Islamic
political groups.
">> Many of Al Jazeera members,"
"journalists, are Islamist, and"
actually my own numbers show
about 60% of Al Jazeera
journalists are Muslim
Brotherhood...
>> REPORTER: 60% are Muslim
Brotherhood?
>> Yes.
>> REPORTER: Other scholars
"dispute Fandy's claim, and Al"
Jazeera denies it's been
infiltrated by any political
group.
">> At least some of them, some"
"people in Doha, they will tell"
you that that shouldn't come as
"a surprise, that there is a"
"certain category of people,"
"Islamists or whatever, in the"
"station, because
that represents"
"a wide section
of Arab society,"
>> REPORTER: At my hotel in the
"Middle East, I watched Al"
Jazeera's evening news.
( speaking Arabic )
"As on many nights, the lead"
story was Iraq.
"In Baghdad's Sadr City, 200"
Shiites had been massacred in
the biggest sectarian attack
since the invasion.
"But tonight, Al
Jazeera followed"
its report with a U.S. military
"spokesman, and asked him if"
America had orchestrated the
">> REPORTER: I wondered, if Al"
"Jazeera was banned from Iraq,"
why was this officer sitting in
their studio?
I found the answer across the
"Arabian peninsula in Dubai,"
where I met two officers from
U.S. Central Command.
You guys seem to enjoy your
work.
>> Love our work.
>> We're very passionate about
"it is what most
people say, they"
detect that.
"It's been, without
a doubt, the"
best assignment I've ever had in
"a 24-year military career, no"
question about it.
>> REPORTER: They are the
vanguard of the military's new
strategy to embrace Arab news
channels.
>> We are trying to get rid of
"the hatred towards America,"
particularly America's military
members.
"I've been to Bosnia, I've been"
"to Kosovo, but
clearly fighting"
"the perception, fighting the"
likes of Al Manara or Al Jazeera
"or Al Araybia, and those who"
want to use those outlets-- Al
Queda and others-- who want to
leverage those media outlets to
reach and propagate their lies
and extremist viewpoints.
"This is a tough, tough fight."
>> REPORTER: Although they
acknowledge many officers still
"believe Al Jazeera
is the enemy,"
these spokesman say their
mission can't succeed without
it.
>> What I think people forget is
the fact that Al Jazeera is much
like any other media outlet.
"It's a business, they're"
catering to their audience.
The message... just like a Fox
"News, Fox caters to its"
audience.
They deliver and package news
with the right message content
that will resonate to there
audience.
There's no question that Al
Jazeera is the same way.
">> In addition, when you"
consider that they reach 50
million throughout the Middle
"East, throughout the Arabic-"
"speaking world, we find"
ourselves in a position of those
are the people we are trying to
reach.
And if Al Jazeera helps us get
"to those people,
we want to talk"
to them.
We want to have the opportunity
"to be on camera,
we want to have"
the opportunity to talk to them
"on background, we want be a"
source.
We want them to call us up.
>> I followed them to the
"channel's arch-rival, Al"
Arabiya.
Launched just three years ago
"and backed by Saudi Arabia, it"
seeks to counter Al Jazeera's
influence.
The officers make a constant
round of courtesy calls to Arab
newsrooms.
Neither speaks Arabic.
">> You recognize Eric, of"
course.
>> REPORTER: They were back to
see Al Arabiya's director of
news.
>> How are you?
>> Fine.
">> Last time, you kissed me on"
my cheek.
>> He was in the way this time.
>> REPORTER: It was the day of
Pierre Gemayal's funeral.
>> How's the funeral coverage
going?
>> The coverage is going very
well.
What's going on there is
"terrible, really."
">> Yeah, it's a
horrible set of"
circumstances.
>> REPORTER: A million Lebanese
were on the streets in support
of the U.S.-backed government.
( speaking Arabic )
Al Arabiya's coverage was
"sympathetic, but its moderate"
tone doesn't mean it's pro-
American.
"So, you just saw our friends"
from the U.S. military.
>> Uh-huh.
>> REPORTER: Do you find that
useful?
>> Having U.S. military people
here?
>> REPORTER: Yeah.
">> Well, I think it is..."
America is doing a charm
offensive toward this part of
the world.
"But at the same
time, they have"
an extremely difficult job to do
because they are trying to sell
unsellable product.
>> REPORTER: I let him get back
to work.
"Across the newsroom, I looked"
for Al Arabiya's chief
"executive, a Saudi newspaper"
columnist who spent 20 years in
London before the power of
television lured him back to the
Middle East.
>> REPORTER: Greg Barker with
FRONTLINE/World.
Nice to meet you.
>> Please come in.
>> REPORTER: Thanks.
>> It's different.
Maybe politics and news in
general in the West is something
more part of entertainment.
Here it's not.
It's part of... a matter of life
and death.
>> REPORTER: Is there a struggle
of ideas going on?
>> A big struggle.
This is actually why this region
is torn for a long time.
It's mostly because of ideas.
>> This is similar to Europe in
the late 19th century and early
20th century-- people talk about
"different ideas, and they will"
go and shoot and kill and have
wars because of their ideas.
>> REPORTER: In an attempt to
get American ideas into the mix
of broadcasts coming out of
"Dubai's booming
media city, last"
summer the State Department sent
its own spokesman with a key
difference...
>> ( speaking Arabic )
>> REPORTER: ...he can speak the
language.
>> ( speaking Arabic )
">> REPORTER: Now,
you don't have"
an office?
>> No.
"This is my office, which never"
leaves me.
( laughs )
If you tie yourself to an
"office, if you
tie yourself to a"
"location, if you
tie yourself to"
"being behind four
walls, you're"
not getting out there and
"engaging, you're not dealing"
with people.
"And the way the
media works, as"
"you know, is you've got to be"
"out there, you've got to be"
where the story is happening
when the story is happening.
>> REPORTER: The State
Department saw Gemayal's
assassination as a direct
challenge to American interests
in Lebanon.
"So, within hours, Michael"
Pelletier was on the air giving
>> I think the responsibility
falls on us as the American
government and the American
people to get out there and get
our viewpoint across.
The more people we have who can
get on those programs and speak
Arabic and present our opinions
"in all their
diversity, then the"
better off we'll be.
And that's what they want for
their programs as well.
>> Americans are very much far
away from the region.
They come here as two groups.
Either they are businesspeople
that come to do business and
"walk out, so they
don't mingle,"
"really, and talk
and convince or"
change minds.
"And the second group,"
"politicians, they stick to the"
official line.
Official lines are not good
enough to convince anyone.
>> REPORTER: For Abdul Rahman Al
"Rashed, who's
devoted his career"
to speaking out against
"fundamentalism,
the real agenda"
is countering the rise of Al
Jazeera.
>> We are winning without bin
"Laden tapes, without bin Laden"
"help, and I think
this is... in"
"my opinion, it's a phenomenon."
And I think it's... it's a
challenge which we need a model
to show to people that we can do
a news station without being
bad... bad media.
>> REPORTER: What do you mean by
"""bad media""?"
>> Without being very much on
"the rhetoric side, with the"
demagogues in the streets.
>> REPORTER: But Al Jazeera
still has the bigger audience
and a global ambition.
"This is Al Jazeera English, a"
"new state-of-the-art, high-"
definition global channel beamed
to a worldwide audience.
It cost the Emir of Qatar an
"estimated one billion dollars,"
the most expensive start-up ever
in broadcast journalism.
>> We are moving from a pan-Arab
regional TV station into an
international media corporation.
"So we thought, ""Okay, let us"
start the English channel.
English is the biggest
"language."""
>> REPORTER: At a time when
Western news channels were
cutting back on their foreign
"coverage, Al
Jazeera was hiring,"
and paying top dollar.
Journalists from America and
Britain signed up by the
hundreds.
The crisis in Lebanon was their
first big story.
>> People have used this
"phrase-- ""reversing
the flow of"
"information""--
south to north,"
instead of always north to
south.
"You know, we are rooted here n"
"the Middle East, which is the"
world's news hotspot.
>> REPORTER: They claim they'll
offer opinions ignored by other
channels...
>> ...and sectarian unrest.
The fact that it was Pierre
"Gemayal, who was a very"
practical...
>> REPORTER: ...and point to
last year's war in Lebanon as an
example of the Western media's
bias towards Israel.
>> Had we been on air during
"that conflict in the summer,"
then I think that's the kind of
"story that, once again, proves"
why the world needs Al Jazeera
in English.
We didn't feel the offerings in
English language of major
international broadcasters at
that time was particularly
balanced or really told the
story of what was going on.
>> The channel's Arab
"executives, just across the"
"road, retain
ultimate editorial"
"control, especially over"
divisive issues.
">> Sure, Al Jazeera is"
"sympathetic to
the Palestinians,"
but they do balance the story.
They do let the Israelis give
"their side, and that's never"
happened before.
">> REPORTER: And
that sympathy,"
you said-- they're sympathetic
towards the Palestinians-- will
that carry over into the English
language?
That kind of...
">> Yeah, yeah, without a doubt"
we will have the same kind of
"editorial guidelines, the same"
"code of ethics and, I think,"
"without a doubt, we would be"
sympathetic to people living in
occupied Palestine.
>> REPORTER: The channel has
"four global broadcast centers,"
"including Malaysia, an Islamic"
nation where English is widely
spoken.
>> We'll have the latest from
Beirut and Damascus.
">> REPORTER: Around the world,"
there are over one billion
Muslims who don't speak Arabic.
Who are you trying to reach?
Who's your target audience?
>> Every English-speaking
person.
>> REPORTER: On a brief stopover
"in London, where I now live, I"
found a group of young Muslim
lawyers and teachers.
All of them were tuning in to
the new channel.
When you heard that it was about
"to launch, were
you anticipating"
it?
>> I was really excited because
I used to watch Al Jazeera in
"Arabic, and..."
>> REPORTER: Do you speak
Arabic?
">> No, I don't, but it's the"
images.
"For example, Iraq, Afghanistan"
"war, it was
obvious to everyone"
"who was watching BBC, CNN, Fox"
"and Al Jazeera, the amount of"
information and coverage that Al
Jazeera did and the difference
between BBC and Al Jazeera.
It was obvious.
>> REPORTER: These views aren't
unusual.
I know a lot of British Muslims
who feel their opinions are
ignored by mainstream media.
>> Westerners don't understand
"this idea, or they find it"
difficult to understand.
"The Muslims in
the Middle East,"
"the way we look at it, we have"
this idea of one Uma... the way
"we look at those Muslims is,"
"when I say they're
my brothers,"
it's as if my own mother gave
birth to this.
"So, every time I see someone"
being attacked or killed
"unjustly, of course, I'm going"
"to think, ""That's
my brother."""
It's as if my own flesh and
blood is being killed.
>> REPORTER: They seemed to
think Al Jazeera English was
meant for them.
>> I saw it when it first came
"out, and even right now, the"
continuing story that they're
following is about the Middle
East and what's happening in the
Middle East.
"So, that's an important story"
for everybody.
"But yet, within the British"
media and within the American
"media, they don't want to"
highlight it that much because
it shows their flaws or their
mistakes and errors which they
make in their own foreign
policy.
>> REPORTER: I arrived back in
"Washington, where each morning"
"at the State Department, they"
listen to the stream of
criticism about America from the
Muslim world.
>> Good morning.
This is Rapid Response Unit.
Today we're looking at...
">> REPORTER: At 6:00 A.M.,"
there's a daily conference call
with the unit's hubs in Europe
and Dubai.
President Bush was in Amman
meeting Iraq's Prim Minister.
">> Well, they both covered the"
press conference live.
>> REPORTER: Secretary Rice was
in Palestine and Israel.
>> ... statements from President
"Bush saying, essentially, that"
we're going to stay in Iraq and
support the Maliki government...
">> REPORTER: And in Lebanon,"
Hezbollah announced plans to
topple the pro-American
"government, starting tomorrow."
>> The big story in the pan-Arab
press is democracy in Lebanon.
We have Nasrallah is live at
the moment or has just gone
"live, Joe..."
">> Yeah, Hassan
Nasrallah gave a"
speech through the Al Manar...
">> REPORTER: By
7:30, they send"
a daily report to top U.S.
"policy makers
around the world,"
summarizing what the foreign
media are saying about America.
>> Hezbollah calls for...
The Hezbollah one is very
"important, I think."
>> Let's say Bush and Maliki
"talks, the issue
is leadership."
How about something like that?
>> REPORTER: I noticed on a lot
of their screens was Al
Jazeera's new channel.
"Right behind you, you're"
watching something that most
Americans in their homes cannot
"see, which is Al Jazeera"
English.
">> Right, right."
>> REPORTER: What do you think
of that?
Why do you watch that?
">> Well, it's a
news station and"
"it's an important
news station,"
because it's trying to reach a
global young audience.
>> English as a second language
audience in the world is very
"big, very big and pretty"
influential.
>> Right.
>> REPORTER: But this
conservative media group
launched a campaign to keep Al
Jazeera English out of America.
">> Clearly, we were disturbed"
because we knew the reputation
of the Arabic Al Jazeera.
Everybody knows it's been a
mouthpiece of Osama Bin Laden
and Al Qaeda.
>> REPORTER: Let me have a look
at that.
Can I see that?
">> Oh, sure."
>> REPORTER: Every major cable
and satellite provider in the
country refused to carry it.
"""Dear Mr. Murdoch,"
Thank you for declining to
distribute Al Jazeera English in
the United States.
"You made the right choice, not"
only for DirecTV but for America
"as a whole."""
Did you send this to Mr. Murdoch
and others?
">> Yes, a whole list of them."
>> REPORTER: DirecTV...
>> All we really did was alert
U.S. cable and satellite
providers to the channel's
history.
I don't think they needed a lot
of convincing.
I don't think there's a big
demand out there for Al Jazeera.
">> REPORTER: Down the road, on"
"Washington's K Street, I found"
the channel's broadcast center
for the Americas.
Their anchor was formerly of
"ABC's Nightline, David Marash."
"Greg Barker, Frontline."
">> Greg, nice to meet you."
>> REPORTER: Good to meet you.
He didn't seem worried about the
bosses back in Qatar.
">> In my contract,
it says that"
if I find myself at editorial
loggerheads with the home
"office, that I can leave."
"So, as I put it,
you know, I've"
got my pill in my pocket.
I don't expect to need it.
>> REPORTER: Marash was covering
the same busy news day as the
State Department's rapid
response team.
You've got a lot of stories in
crises simultaneously in the
Middle East now.
">> We do, and I
have to say that"
we have been not only allowed
but encouraged to sort of add
that up.
What is it that explains
"simultaneous--
not just crises,"
but confrontational challenges--
"to American policy in Tehran,"
"Baghdad, Beirut, and Palestine"
at the same time.
">> REPORTER: Tonight, Marash's"
"top story would
be Lebanon, not"
Bush's meeting on Iraq.
His old colleagues at ABC would
likely play things differently.
>> The American networks will
start with Iraq and Bush first;
they're American and so is all
of their audience.
We're global and so is almost
all of our audience.
That perspective means a more
critical take on America.
America has never been perceived
as more isolated and less
influential.
"I think that, probably, we're"
pursuing that angle harder than
our network colleagues are.
And it's not because we want to
"undermine America's position,"
it's because the reality is that
America's position is undermined
and nobody needs to understand
that more than Americans.
>> REPORTER: It was my last
night on the road.
"In my hotel, I watched how the"
networks covered that day's
flood of events from the Middle
East.
"They were, as David Marash"
"predicted, all very American-"
centric.
>> ...made clear that he has no
plans for dramatic changes in
Iraq.
>> REPORTER: Over on Al Jazeera
"English, things
were different."
"But to find it
here in America,"
I had to go online.
And I remembered a conversation
I had had back in Dubai.
What do you think about all the
controversy in the states over
Al Jazeera English?
">> You know, you were doing"
really...
>> I think it's ludicrous.
I think it's absolutely
ludicrous.
"It's another outlet, another"
chance to get another point of
view out to the American public.
"It's a disservice
to Americans,"
"who, unfortunately,
I'm seeing,"
are becoming more and more
"insulated, more and more"
insular.
>> And by not having Al Jazeera
"available in the U.S., it"
doesn't allow it to stand or
fall on its own merits.
>> REPORTER: In their efforts to
improve America's image in the
"Muslim world, these officers"
have come to believe that we
"have something to learn, too."
>> I've never been afraid of
"ideas, and I have no fear that"
any ideas brought through
journalism to the United States
would be something that would so
harm us that we not only can't
"survive it, but can't learn"
something from it and do better.
And it's a part of the world we
">> Finally tonight, how"
reporters are risking their
lives and their freedom to
uncover stories that challenge
>> REPORTER: Journalists: They
"are the eyes, they are the"
watchdogs of power.
"Without journalists, there are"
very few checks on the excesses
of wealth and power.
Journalists provide information
that allows people to make
decisions about their lives.
Democracies around the world
continue to function because
there are journalists out there
"still doing their jobs, risk"
"their lives, still believing"
that they can make a difference.
I'm Sheila Coronel.
I'm an investigative journalist
from the Philippines.
I left last year to teach at
Columbia University.
I am also on the board of the
Committee to Protect
Journalists.
I started out during the
twilight years of the Marcos
dictatorship.
I was working for the largest
newspaper in the country.
We were not allowed to write
anything negative about the
regime.
We couldn't even print
photographs showing Imelda
Marcos's double chin.
We had great hopes for freedom
"after the fall
of Marcos, but 21"
"years after, the
Philippines has"
become one of the most dangerous
places to be a journalist.
This is because the rule of law
is weak.
"The courts, the
justice system,"
the entire structure of
government cannot provide
protection.
60 journalists have been killed
since 1986.
I've lost friends in the
"Philippines, killed because of"
their reporting.
And while the situation in my
"country is
especially bad, it's"
With the collapse of the Soviet
"Union, there was a very brief"
period when a lot of independent
newspapers and TV stations came
out with critical reports of the
government.
But that whole era is over.
The euphoria ended very fast.
The Russian media has been put
under severe restrictions by
"Vladimir Putin, whose allies"
have taken over most of the
media organizations.
The critical voices are limited
to small-circulation newspapers.
Anna Politkovskaya was an
investigative journalist.
She was writing for a relatively
small newspaper about the war in
Chechnya.
She wrote about a very dirty war
that most Russians would rather
forget.
She's been called the conscience
>> REPORTER: Anna is one of 13
journalists who've been killed
in gangland-style executions
since the takeover of Vladimir
Putin.
She was killed in her own
apartment.
"A hired assassin
shot her once,"
and shot her again to make sure
she was really dead.
I think Russians will always
"remember that, in this dark"
"moment of their history, Anna"
Turkey has a free press but
there are certain touchy issues
that the Turkish authorities are
very sensitive about.
Any attempt to resurrect the
genocide of Armenians that took
place in 1915 is not tolerated.
Several journalists and writers
have been convicted of
"""insulting Turkishness"" for"
writing about the Armenian
Question.
Hrant Dink was a Turkish
Armenian.
He was the editor of a well-
>> REPORTER: Hrant was shot just
outside his office by a 17-year-
old Turkish nationalist.
"100,000 people came to his"
funeral.
Those who gathered there
appreciated the importance of
his work.
>> Today is the day we stand up
all together and say as
"Armenians, we're going to show"
the world that we will keep
Hrant's wishes alive.
We will follow what Hrant's
"words were, what his mission,"
objectives were in life.
>> REPORTER: In many countries
"in Africa, the
press has become"
free after the fall of
autocratic regimes.
But there are places like
Zimbabwe where the press is very
much in the thrall of Mugabe.
>> Mr. Mugabe's government has
total control over the media.
He appreciates that there is
power in journalism.
He fears the free flow of the
information because he knows the
potential to undermine him.
I started a new newspaper when
it had become so obvious that
the people were so tired of
government propaganda.
"The motto of The
Daily News was,"
"""Telling it like it is."""
And that's what we went out to
"do and, predictably,
we soon ran"
on a collision course with
Mugabe's government.
I was arrested.
"Then, some people bombed our"
printing press and I was advised
to desist or I would face dire
consequences.
My greatest frustration is I am
away from the situation where I
can play a meaningful role in
>> REPORTER: The press has never
been freer in China than it is
"now, and that
freedom comes from"
rapid economic growth.
The market-- not the state--
freed the media.
Journalists have been able to
write exposes about government
"corruption, about social"
"problems, but journalists must"
be constantly aware of how far
"they can go, because the power"
of the state can be exercised
arbitrarily and there are no
legal guarantees of a free
press.
Jiang Weiping was writing about
corruption involving high
officials in northeast China
where he worked.
He wrote about a vice mayor who
lost $3 million in gambling
debt.
He wrote about a mayor who built
houses for 29 mistresses.
Jiang was in prison for more
than five years.
"While in jail, he wrote a"
message for his daughter:
"""Though the road
home has many"
"twists and turns, your daddy"
believes that we will be
reunited soon.
This world contains so many
"things that are
not eternal, but"
only truth and justice truly
rule the drama of human life.
Your old father will not be
toppled on this cold night.
The giant dragon strides into a
new century.
Your old father stands on the
dragon's shoulders.
He will certainly pick up his
"In Iraq, some journalists were"
killed in the crossfire.
But what people don't know is
that most of the journalists who
have been killed have been
deliberately targeted.
Atwar Bahjat was a reporter for
Al Arabiya television.
Her father was Sunni and her
mother was Shiite.
>> REPORTER: She reported
fearlessly on the war and never
took sides in the increasingly
violent conflict there.
She always wore a pendant
representing a unified Iraq.
>> REPORTER: She was reporting
in Samarra in February 2006.
She was gunned down there by
unknown men who just grabbed her
from where she was broadcasting.
Atwar's killing shocked Iraqis
"because, to them,
she was really"
the symbol of national unity.
Gunmen even shot at Atwar's
funeral procession.
We've just talked about a few
journalists of the hundreds
who've been murdered or jailed
because of their work.
The paradox is that the press is
freer or more powerful now than
it has ever been before.
The tragedy is that journalists
who exercise that freedom pay a
very high cost.
What makes us humans is because
we can express ourselves.
"If we are unable to speak out,"
then we cannot be fully human
and these journalists remind us